So good
morning, everyone.
So that's a start. And start
with a quick recap of what we
covered. In last
session. So so far,
we introduced. Before that I
mean is there any questions from
the last sessions or any
previous weeks about the
lectures or labs etc? I'm ready
for. Your question.
No
questions.
OK, go ahead Travis.
Ah, if I mean when you are
considering, I mean representing
a negative number, you have to
1st. I mean pictures system. So
we already introduced two
systems, sign magnitude and.
Radix complement, for instance,
if you are in base 9.
Uh and you assume that you are
in a signed magnitude system.
You have to assume that the the
position in the highest. The highest
significant position is the sign
so if it is non 0 means that the
the number is negative.
Uh, and The thing is in base 9
you can use 123 up until 8 to
represent a negative number so
you if you're given a number you
just simply look at the highest
significant position and if it
is non zero it means that the
number is negative. So then you
start looking at the other
digits in order to figure out
what's the value. If you wanted
to convert it to the decimal
value so you just skip the
highest significant position
because that's a sign.
And then you start converting to
the decimal system by just doing
the. I mean the algorithm we
already covered just some of the
multiplication of each digit to
the significant of each
position. In base five for
instance, again and you look at
the higher significant position
if it is non 0, meaning that if
it if it is 1234 it means that
the number is negative.
And if the highest position is
zero. It means that the number
is positive. This is in sign
magnitude, but in.
Radix complements processing
base nine. If you assume that
the negative number is in the
radix compliment here the
base is 9, it becomes nines
complement, so you assume that
the negative numbers are in
nine's complements. So based on
our formula, you have to figure
out that given number is higher
than the first half of the range
of the numbers or no.
If it is less or equal that
first half number. It means
that the number is positive if
it is more than that it means
that the number is negative
and you have to apply nine's
complements in order to figure
out what was the positive
number for that and then put
it negative sign behind that.
So for the base five for
instance, you have to figure out
if the system is fives
complements to represent a
negative number. You have to 1st
figure out what is the first
half so we said that if you are
given for instance, you have to
count the number of digits first
if the number of digits is for
instance, 6 digit. You have to
1st figure out what is the first
half of the range with six
positions. in base five it
is a 5 to the power of 6
- 1 / 2.
And we already said that.
This number is equal to.
5 / 2 becomes 223333, so it's
kind of 1 two and if you are
given six position, 1, two and
five three. So if they give a
number is more than this or
equal is less or equal to this
number, it means that the number
is negative positive if they
know they given number is higher
than this number, it means that
the number is negative and you
have to apply five's compliment
to figure out what's the number.
I hope I answered your question.
Thank you. So
let's start a?
Today, actually by the way I
mean today, we are going to
release the I mean marks for the
1st.lab assignment and lecture
assignment. And uh also today
midnight is the deadline for the
second lab, and lecture
assignments, so be careful about
that do not put it in the last
minutes because sometimes the
last minutes. the Internet
connections or the computer
problems actually may actually
prevent you to upload your or
submit your assignment so please
do this before the deadline.
So. Let's take recap on the
gates, we introduced so far, so.
We said because we are in the
positive logic and we are going
to build computer system based
on the positive logic.
We are interested in when the
output gonna be one so within
not gate. We only have one input
and if the input is 0 the output
gonna be 1.
So else, the output going to be
0 so if the input is 1 the
output gonna be zero.
But again, we only consider
the time or the when the
output becomes one.
In the end if you have if you're
given an address to input three
inputs, four input or even n
input. If all the inputs are
one. Then the output going to be
one else, the output gonna be 0.
For the OR gates because if one
at least one of the inputs are
one. It makes the OR gates in
the output. One so if you are
given an or gate with 234 N.
Inputs if at least one input
actually could be and could be
seen in the input the output
going to be 1.
Uh, in the last session there
were two. I mean to Typo in the
in this slide for the NAND and
nor basically nand was not, and
so whatever makes the and zero
makes the nand one. So what makes
and zero if we have at least one
digit or one input with digit
zero, it makes the and not zero,
but it makes the NAND one. So
for the NAND gate, if at least 1
zero happens in the input, the
output. Gonna be one nor is not
or so whatever actually makes
the OR zero makes the number one
so if all the inputs are zero
because when we have all the
input zero the or becomes 0.
So then nor becomes one, so if
all the inputs are zero then nor
becomes one. These are the way
that sometimes you need to see
whether the inputs are zero or
no. Or you could simply use the
nor gate in order to figure out
the input binary digit is 0 or
non 0. So if it is 0, meaning
that having zero in all the
digits, so the output going to
be one for the nor gate.
And uh.
So I fixed this slide in the
blackboard and also in the
recording in the caption we fix
this slide. So, we, we are good
to go with the topics in this
lecture new topic.
So let me just open the.
Next slide.
For today, which is
called universality.
Let me
just.
So.
So today, we're going to discuss
is it possible to build any
digital unit, or any logic
circuit by only given the gates
we introduced so far.
This topic is called
universality, I mean, uh in
another way, we are looking for.
A universal set meaning that a
building all type or any type of
digital units based on these
five gates we introduced so far.
The answer is yes, and uh so we
don't need to introduce any new
gates to build the unit so these
are enough for us for any type
of I mean, uh logic circuits.
But this question goes further
and then we can say that I
can, we reduce this set an build
any logical circuits or any
digital unit with a less number
of gates. Uh, for instance, if
you go to market and you can
find the not gate, is it
possible to build the not gate
given the and nor an for
instance other gates?
Or sometimes in the market one
gate is expensive. So is it
possible to uh reproduce or to
build that expensive not with
just other cheap gates or not.
We already saw that nand is not
and so we can build in and with
and and not gates. Also, the
reverse which we saw that we
could build the not gate with
NAND gate so we simply input.
In a variable for this X into
the both input of the NAND gate.
So the output is like the not
on the input so, based on that
idea. We want to reduce the
universal set. We want to see
that? What is the minimum number
of gates required to build any
logic units or any digital
circuits? So the first one, is
trivial because we have all the
gates and not and or NAND nor it
is called full set.
And you already saw that build
NAND and nor with the and, plus
not for the NAND and or plus not
with for the Nor so again we
can build any digital circuits
or any logical units by just
three. Gates not and or again.
This is called full site. So we
continue to figure out can, we
reduce the set a little bit more
in another word is it possible
to. Build any digital units with
not an and without the OR gate.
So. In order to answer this we
have to figure out we can build
is it possible to build the OR
gate with not an and so if you
could build the OR gate with NOT
and AND. So we can transform this
set to the previous set. This
one and then we can build any
digital circuit. So the only
thing we have to prove is or we
have to show is that we can
build the OR gate with NOT an
and. And the same with the other
I mean, reduce sets for
instance, is it possible to be
delete any digital unit with not
on or so for us to show this we
have to prove or show that we
can build the and gates.
And then we have NOT OR and AND,
then we are back to this set to
the full set and we are OK to
build any digital units.
The same is here, so the sample
the next question is, it
possible to build any logical
units or visual units with only
not gate so in order to show
this we have to prove that with
only not gate. We can build the
AND, and OR and then we are, we
have the full set and you're OK
to build any type of digital
circuits an etc. So today in the
first part of this session.
We're going to cover this you
want to figure out what is the
minimum. A universal set
for logical circuits.
So let's start with the
first one up building a
OR with NOT and AND.
So.
In another world we are going to
build. We will go to the market
and buy the and gate and not
gate and we want to build or
gate with these two gates.
If you could that you could
set not an AND is a complete
set because we can build the
OR and then complete set
becomes a full set.
So this is the question is not
an AND a universal set.
Uh, and the answer is if we
could show that we can build the
OR gate. It is a universal set.
So, in order to build the OR
with not an end August. Morgan
was the first person I mean. He
was a mathematician and
logician again, you can see that
there's a huge contribution of
math and logic logic to the
computer systems. In 19 century,
he introduced this brilliant law
or formula. Which today is
called the Morgans formula after
I mean? We name this formula
after his uh I mean his
contribution? So basically it
says that this is a very
important law or formula.
Uh X or Y followed by a
NOT is equal to X bar.
And why bar? Basically it says
that if you bring the not gate,
the prime inside the
parenthesis, it goes on top of
each variable and then changes
the OR 2 and.
So this is the first a law that
kind of shows the relationship
between and an or.
So if you're given and you can
simply apply another not on the
both side of the equation here.
If I do another prime or another
not ,not on top of the not
actually makes the  not,
I mean removed in not so it
becomes X or Y and then we have
x bar and y bar another not.
So if you could simply apply
another not on both sides of the
equation. We can have OR
with and gate.
So it should this contribution
goes to the Morgan and this is
the gates for or just using NOT
and AND gate so if we input X&Y.
Then uh by NOT becomes x bar
an y bar and so x bar.
and because of the D Morgan's
law this one is equal to X
or Y bar?
So again previous questions says
a previous laws. De Morgan's
laws say x bar, and y bar is
equal to X or Y bar so here.
This One X bar and Y Bar is
equal to X or Y bar an so we
we just do another not to remove
this not so not on top of the
nut. Actually makes it seems
like there's no not in the
expression so it becomes X or Y.
So this is uh the logic circuit
based on the AND and not for
building the OR gate . So NOT and
AND is a universal set because
we could we could build the OR
gate and we can then we can
build any type of logic circuits
or digital units.
So this is a or gate so we
already saw how we showed or
with the curve. But if you are
not given the OR gate. This is
the way we can build the OR gate.
So X bar Y bar and and then
another bar because of the D
Morgan's law brilliant law.
So we could answer this, so the
next question is.
How about this one if you are
given only not an or gate? Is it
possible to build an AND gate?
And then uh we have the full
set. So let's discover this.
So the question is, given only
the NOT and OR gate, is it
possible to build any digital
units and the only thing we have
to show that we can build AND
gate with NOT and OR gate then
you have we have the full set.
So. The Morgan actually
introduced a second law, which
is this, this is the 2nd.
D Morgans law, it says that.
If you bring the NOT inside the
parenthesis and the operator is
AND. Yeah, it goes on top
of each variable and change
the AND to OR
So X&Y Bar is equal to x bar
or y bar. So this is a
relationship between AND and OR
another one. So we have two D
Morgan's law because these are
these are very important law in
logical design. So given this,
if you apply another NOT on both
side. It diffused this not so
not on top of the not nothing so
it in the right side. We could
have X&Y and in the left side.
We have x bar or y bar and
then another bar or another
prime so this easy. It is easy
to build the AND gate with just
NOT and OR gate.
And the logic circuit or the
digital is this so X Bar.
And then y bar or with each
other? And this is equal to X&Y
Bar by the D Morgan's Law. The
second law and then we apply
another not just to remove this
not so then becomes X&Y.
So this is the way we build the
AND gate by only using the OR and
NOT gate, so in another word we
can have AND this way.
So this is the new way of having
AND. So you could answer
this question that yes, not
on or is the universal set
because we could build and
and then we have the fullset.
So we could say yes for this
not. The answer is without
showing this the answer is no
and this is trivial because the
not gate only accept one input.
So when we have one input. We
cannot build a gate with two
inputs, so by just using not
give you cannot build AND and OR?
And when we don't have AND and
OR we cannot build a any logical
unit or digital units that
requires again with two inputs.
Even if you are given 2 not
gates. We cannot simply attach
the output to each other so by
not gates. I mean, even multiple
not gates. You cannot build AND
or OR gate.
The same is with uh if they are
given only AND gates.
Uh, the reason is with and gate.
There is no way for you to build
a NOT gate. So at home you can
practice this and try this. But
the answer is no, because even
if you for instance input the
both input of the AND gate with
the same input, it is X&X, so it
is at the output going to be X.
The output is not x bar, so
there is no way to build not
gate with only and gate.
The same is or there is no way
to build the not gate with or
if you could then you have not
unknown. You have this set and
then you could build AND and
then you have the full set but
there is no way to build not
gate with OR gate.
So for these three, these
are not the universal set.
How about the NAND?
We already saw that with the
NAND gates. We can build the
NOT gates simply in putting the
same variable into both input of
the NAND gate behaves or act
like the NOT gate.
So this gives us an idea that
there might be a possibility of
building an AND and OR gate in NAND.
So let's see how can we do
that, so the question is, is
only one gate of I mean, one
type of gate from the NAND
type is it enough for building
any logic circuits or not.
So we already saw that the NOT
is can be built by the NAND gate
by just simply this formula X&X.
Bar is equal to X Bar.
And this is the NAND X&X
bar is got not so this
is the way we already
built the NOT gate.
X goes to the both input of the
NAND gate so and followed by a
not x bar so we could build the
not gate with only NAND.
How about the AND? Is it
possible to build on AND the
question is yes and we already
knew that because when we built
the NAND gate, we said that if
we follow a NAND gate with not
it becomes NAND. So if we apply
another not so not NAND is not
not NAND so both is not on top of
each other actually diffuse each
other. So we have only AND so
again not not.
AND is AND.
In order to do that, we already
built in not gate with the NAND
so, if we just put stack two
NAND with each other. The first
one. X&Y not which is the X NAND
Y so this is the NAND. So we
apply another not just diffuse
the not so we, we already built
the not gate with the NAND so we
input this into both input of
the NAND gate so it goes another
not. So not X NAND Y
is equal to not not
AND, which is X&Y.
So this is the way we build.
We can build the AND Gates
with two NAND gates.
The first one normal NAND and the
second one except the output of
the first NAND into both input of
the 2nd NAND.
And so we already showed showed
that if we have not gate and
if we have and gate. We can
build the OR gate. So we already
knew that so basically by the
D morgan law, we can build the
OR gate. But this time only
using the NAND gate.
So we have been not with the NAND
gate. We have the AND with the
NAND gate. Now we can build the
OR with the NAND gate.
So basically the D Morgan's law
X or Y bar is equal to x bar
and y bar. So if you apply
another not in both sides so
another NOT here another NOT
here, so these two NOT on top
of each other diffuse each other
so we only have X or Y here we
have not x bar.
And y bar so this is exactly
the NAND x bar.
And y bar not is equal to X
bar and y bar so if we do this.
It means that it is equal to X
or Y this is because of the D
Morgan's law as a mathematic
mathematician so this is a
mathematic formula that helps
the computer scientist to build
computer systems. And this is
the OR with NAND Gates. So X
bar. So X into input of the NAND
becomes x bar. Y goes to both
input of another NAND gate,
becomes y bar and then x bar
x'. y' AND NOT is equal
to X or Y?
So it basically x' and y'
bar. I mean another not
here with space on the day.
Morgan's law as we saw here.
As we saw, here x', and
y' another bar is equal to
the X or Y so here are the
equal to X.
So we by using three NAND gates.
We could build the OR so we can
say that the NAND Gate is a
universal set. So by just
playing the NAND Gates, you can
simply build any digital units
or any logic circuits.
In fact, if you go to the market
in the market. You can buy this
one. You can go to this URL and
figure out different cheap or
ic integrated circuits to buy.
Uh and then use it to build your
digital units. So for instance,
this is the I mean the IC or
transistor or the chip for the.
A NAND gate if you buy this
one this is the I mean the.
Yeah, kind of full off the
inside the chip and this is the
from the outside and this is the
logical designed for this
physical devices. So basically
you can buy the 7400 Ic it
says it's quad two input in
this. It has four quad means 4
four NAND gate. San all the NAND
gates are two inputs.
So you you go to the market and
buy this, Ic.
And then in order to have for
instance, you want to uh not
something you simply wire your
variable X into both input of
one of these NANDS so X NAND X
becomes x' or the output
gonna be NOTs gate again. You
can put another input y, and
y into the another not of the
Ic another not of the NAND
of the ic and then the output
gonna be not.
If you need or, you could
simply, I mean the output of
this, so you produce the x'
here and y' here, you could
just attach these two I mean.
Output to the input of this NAND
gate so X Bar, NAND Y bar is equal
to X or Y so this way. You can
create the OR also for the AND
at home practice? How can you
use this ic to produce AND?
So. The answer is yes, and
actually indeed. I mean in the
today's market. It is possible
to buy the NAND gates in the ic
very I mean cheap.
So the next question is how
about the nor is it possible
to have only nor can build not
and and or gates in order to
have the full set and build
all the digital units.
So this is the question is
nor gate is a universal
gates or set or not.
Oh, by the way when we have more
than one gate. It is called
Universal sets one more than one
gate. If we are given only a set
of 1 member instead of saying
universal set. We can say
Universal Gate. So NAND is in
Universal Gate and we show that
NOR is another universal gate.
But NOT is not a universal gate.
It needs another gate for instance AND
to be a universal set to build
any digital units.
So for the NOR.
This is the formula for NOT OR
and AND. For the NOR, we already
saw that X or X is equal to X
and and then followed by not is
equal to X not or X bar so if we
input. The both input of the NOR
gate with the same variable.
It is acting or it is behaving
like not so we could build in
NOT with only NOR gates.
How about the OR nor was not or
so we apply another NOT in the
end so NOt NOT OR is equal to
or? And for the AND gate we
use this second law of the
Morgan so the Morgan says that
if. Actually, the Morgans last
is that x' or y'
is equal to.
X.
Uh let me see.
If you don't do this not
the moments losses that x'
or y' is equal to.
Let me see D morgan's law.
This one. Or x' or y' is
equal to X&Y Bar, so if we apply
another not on both sides. You
could have x' or y'. Not
and here we just remove the
bar so we have X&Y.
So let's practice this.
This one so we apply another not
on both sides so the left side
becomes x' or y'  than
not which is equal to we remove
just the bar here so X&Y so this
is equal to what?
X bar or Y bar followed by a NOT is
the nor gate so it is equal to
x' nor y'.
So. This is the uh
actual logic design for the NOT
with NOR gate.
For the OR as I said, I would
not not NOR now is equal not.
Nor, which is equal to not not
or is equal to OR so you just
put the X&Y into NOR gate. So it
becomes X or Y or and then you
not this by inputing into
another nor gate. So we just
remove this. This is a not so we
just not on top of the not is
equal to X or Y as you can see
here not on top of the not.
The AND as I said
XX you just created not
x'. Using this gate and then
y, y' ,y' x'
or not is the NOR so X bar
or y' is the D morgan's law is
equal to X&Y.
So the answer is yes, we could
build any we could build and and
or an not with only nor gates
and in fact, if you go to the
market you can buy this, IC.
Then attach it to your digital
board and this is the image of
the inside in the.
Uh, inside of the chip or the
inside of the ic
chip , it has a quad 4 nor
Gates. All the NOR gates are two
input and this Ic is called
seven 7400 two so any? I mean
you can look again and see all
the different manufacturers
that build this. IC this is
the logical design.
For this course we only consider
the logical design, but in
Electrical Engineer they. They
think of I mean for instance,
who make this physical device
for this logical design and is
it. I mean, good quality or not,
but in this course. We only come
out. I mean, consider the
logical design of the ICs, so
if you go to the market. You can
buy this with four NOR and
then whenever you need not you
can Simply put, one.
Variable X for instance into both
and put up at the NOR so you
attached your variable to the uh
input Y1Y1B, and then the output
in one A gonna be the not.
The same here and also to
produce the AND we can simply
input the x' and y'
into these? I mean Inputs
this nor gates and then you
have in the output X&Y.
So based on the mathematical
formula from the d morgan's law
could say that with nor gate. We
can build NOT ,AND and OR gates
and then we are good to build
any logical units or the result
design digital units.
So questions so far.
Oh, the arrow pointing upward is
a NAND pointing downward is NOR
and for the NOT is is prime. So
if you put the prime on top of
a variable or any parentheses is
not, you can draw a bar.
Uh, on top of parentheses or on
top of a variable to show the
NOT to. So when we introduce the
NOT gate. We said that
different ways to show the NOT
is just putting the prime or
bar. But for the NAND. It is
upward arrow. We usually do not
use the upward arrow. We just
simply say that the NAND is X&Y.
Not we usually showed the NAND by
AND and not as I just using the
upward arrow, but that's another
way to show the NAND  for the
NOR we jus  show this as X or
Y bar. Instead of just doing the
X Downward Arrow Y.
So there are these are different
ways to show the gates.
Yes, the prime is a not or bar
or whenever you see that I'm I'm
saying X bar mean I mean, I mean
because x' or X prime is the
same in the both are not gate.
So, whenever I say x'. I
mean x Prime and the same.
These are the same X prime
x' is the same.
Any other questions?
So seems we're good to go so
now. We know that we can
build any digital units or
logical circuits based on nand as
the universal gate or the new
NAND gate as a universal set.
Or even if you have not and or
we are able to build any logical
units. So the next question is,
let's start. Let's start and
design any circus we need to do
our processing or analyzing the
information. Before we introduce
how can we design new gates or
larger units by using the
smaller units for instance, we
said that we can build an AND
with three input by using a two
and gates with two inputs.
So we can have a larger and gate
with three inputs, we could
build a NAND gate with three
input. Also, or with three
inputs or with four inputs, so
we already designed new larger
units. But when we did that. We
kind of using a design pattern
for instance, we already knew
that? How can we extend an AND
with two inputs to have an AND
with three input or we have an
ad with four inputs and etc. And
then we use the same design
pattern to build an or gate with
three input or or gate with four
inputs and then.
Ah, when we wanted to build
the NAND NAND gate with three
input that design pattern
didn't work. So we set that
let's have a AND with three
input and then followed by the
not. But that was kind of I
mean, using our own
intelligence or kind of using
somebody's I mean, intelligent
that produce that design
pattern.
Today we are going to introduce
an algorithm which doesn't
necessarily need any kind of
intelligence or in advance. I
mean, this knowing advanced
design pattern to design any
logic units. We want to
introduce an algorithm or a step
by step. Flow that any type of
question given to us in order to
build a computer system or
digital system to answer that
question, we just simply follow
this steps to produce the.
Logical design for that mean
system or digital system so then
whatever question we actually
received we could simply follow
these steps and then the output
gonna be a logical design for
the system to build.
This is the algorithm we are
going to build today. So
basically as I said, given any
question we want to build a
logic circuits for that. But
it step by step using the
truth table and will see in
the next few slides.
To do this we have to 1st
introduce a new topic concept
called Minterm. Uh it is called
also standard product and here
minterm is this.
Imagine you are given only one
binary variable you only have
one input so X an X bar
or those I mean, possibilities
to show one binary variable.
We we say when variable happens
like this without any NOt. We
call this the variable happens
in the normal form.
So without any nots means that
the variable happens in this an
in its normal form.
And when we have not on top of
the I mean, only the only Binary
Variable. We call this. The
variable happens in the in its
complement form so if you are
given only one variable. We have
two different form normal form
and compliment form.
So why we call this normal
form this One X the reason is
because we are in a positive
logic. We always interested
in the Times that the
variable or the output
becomes one. We usually
consider this zero as the
default connected to the
ground so that's why we call
X without any not as the
normal form at it means that
if X is in order to this form
comes one. The X must be one.
An in order this expression
this compliment form in order
to be one the X must be 0 and
then followed by another not
becomes one, so that's why we
we always want to show in
a way that when the variable
becomes one.
So then we assigned a minterm
to each form.
Based on the weights on the
decimal index, so for the export
we assign minterm called
Minterm 0. To x' to the
compliment form of the variable
X? And as you can see here, the
reason is it mean if the X?
Becomes the binary digit
for the decimal value, 0,
the x' becomes one.
And here for the the other form
of the variable in the normal
form X we assign M 1, meaning
that the Minterm  one meaning
that if this presentation this
form has the representation or
has the value of binary digits
for the decimal value of 1.
This expression becomes one.
So when we have only one
variable if X is binary digit
one this expression becomes one.
If we are given x' if the
expression. The X becomes the
binary digit for the zero the
x' becomes one.
If you're given two binary
variables? How many different
forms in terms of the AND gate we
can show that.
So one time is both variables
are in the normal form. So X&Y
and the other form to show
the AND of them is this x'
Y another form is XY bar and
then the last possibility is
x' y', meaning that
both variables has in its
complement forms.
So then we can assign minterms
to each form when we are given
two variables. So we assign
M-02 X bar and Y Bar and the
reason is when this
expression becomes one.
It happens when we represent X&Y
by the binary digit of 0.
So binary digit of 0 with two
positions is 00. So zero by
followed by a not becomes 1 0,
here by not becomes one and one
and one becomes one, so whenever
we represent binary digits 0 for
these two variables X bar and Y
Bar becomes one.
We assign M1 to this one, to this
expression. So meaning that if
we represent X&Y by the Binary
Digit of one, this expression
becomes one, so what's
the Binary Digit for one given two
positions? It is 01. 01, one goes
to the X and zero goes to Y,
so X is 1 and Y is 0 and then
followed by a not, it becomes one
and one, and one becomes one.
So if we represent this as 01,
the expression becomes one.
The same is with M2 so here if
you are given this, we assign
the term M2 to this because
if we represent this expression,
if you represent
the binary digit of two, it is
equal to 10. 1 goes to Y and
zero goes to X, and then X
followed by a not makes the zero
becomes one, and one and one
becomes one. The same here we
assign M3 to this
because if we represent this
expression as the binary digit
of three, the Binary Digital of
Three was 11, so here
one and one AND each other and
becomes one. So this is the
way we assign minterms terms to
the end of the variables,
different expression for AND
of the variables.
If you are given three input
variables, so basically we could
name these three variables XY&Z.
And how many different
forms can we show the
end of the variables?
So can you answer this question?
We are given three input
variables XY&Z, how many
different forms we can show that
when we AND them with each
other? The normal form and
the compliments form.
True. Yes, eight times
because it's each variable
can have two forms:
Normal form and compliment form.
And each position has can have
two different forms, so 2 * 2 *
2 is in other words, 2 to the
power of 3, eight different
forms, and these are eight
different forms. X bar, Y bar, Z
bar or X prime, Y prime, Z prime, AND
with each other and we assign
the minterm zero to this
expression and the reason is if
we represent the binary digit
for the zero, it becomes 000
and then each variable followed
by the not becomes 111 and AND
together becomes one.
And the same with other min
terms and for
another instance, M5. Why we
assign M5 to this one?
Because if we represent XY&Z
with the binary digit for 5, what's
the binary digit for 5 in three
positions? Anybody
can answer this.
What's the binary digit for 5? Yes,
101. So 101. 1 goes to the
Z, 0 goes to the Y, and 1 goes
to the X so 101 and if zero
becomes not, it becomes one. So one
AND one AND one becomes one. So
this is the way we assign the
minterms to the expressions.
And then at the last min term is
M7, meaning that if you assign
111, the end is gonna be 1.
In general, if we are
given N binary values in
the input, each
variable can take 2 forms: normal
and complements, and so if you're
given N Binary variables in
total,  We're going to have two
to the power of N different way
to end of the variables OK.
And these are the different
ways. And then we assign the min
terms to these
different forms of the
variables this
way, so the first one is M0,
meaning that if all the N
binary variables becomes 0,
their prime become one, and
AND of them altogether becomes
one. And you continue up until
the last minterm, which is for
instance, if you are given four
variables, it becomes.
15, two to the power
of 4 - 1 becomes 15. So M15
goes to the four variables and
all must be one in order to make
the AND one.
So this is the general
way to assign minterms to the
Different form of the
input variables.
So this is one part of the
design algorithm,
another part of the design
algorithm is the truth table,
which comes from Mathematicians
and from the logicians. You can
figure out more about the truth
table, the story
behind it and etc., from this
link and it is way before the
design of the computer systems.
So we use already the truth
table when we build the AND
Gates, OR gates or not gates. We
could simply say that for
each gate, we have a truth
table, which shows the
functionality. Also whenever we
wanted to analyze a given
digital structure or digital
unit, we form the truth table
just to analyze what's the
functionality of the structure.
So here we want to put more
focus on the truth table and use
it as one of the parts for the
design algorithm. So basically
in the truth table in the left
side you have the input
variables. In this example here,
you can see input variable, we
have only one binary input
variable. If you have two, we put
put two variables, X&Y. If I
three, we put three variables XYZ
and the naming is up to you. You
could name for instance, ABC. We
could name them for instance, I
don't know, EFG for
instance, so picking
the name of the variable
actually doesn't matter. But the
number of the variables actually
matters. And in the right side
you have the Boolean function
that is supposed to work based
on the input variables.
So left side, the input
variables, right side is the
Boolean expression or Boolean
function that we want to build
in the logic circuit.
So with one variable.
Here is the X, we just put X,
you could put the name A for
instance, and each each row is
the possibilities for the input
variable. Because we have one
variable, there are two
possibilities under the input. It is
zero or one.
And for the right side we could
have different function or
Boolean expression to build or
in another way, you could say there are
different logic units based on
one binary variable.
The most easiest one is the
Boolean expression constant
function 1. Whatever X is, F(X) or
F as a function of the input
variable, X is always one, so we
don't care about what is the
value of the input.
This is equal to the constant
function one in math.
Another immediate, I mean a
possibility for the Boolean
expression or function based on
one variable is this, zero.
Regardless of the input. We just
only zero. This is the constant
function 0 in math.
F(X) is always equal to 0,
regardless of the value of X.
And we could have this boolean
expression. Uh. F(X) is
equal to X prime. We already saw
this as the not gate, so whenever
X is 0, F(X) is X bar or X not or X
prime. If X is 0, F(X) is 1. If X
is 1, F(X) is X bar, which is
equal to 0.
So this is the truth table for
this boolean functions which we
already called this not.
But The thing is here.
We wanna make an Association
between them minterms and the
truth table. The Boolean
expression in the truth table
based on them minterms.
We already knew that X bar is
equal to Minterm 0.
Why? Because if X is the binary
digit for 0 the X bar becomes one.
So let's do this.
Instead of just saying F(X) is
equal to X bar. You could say
that F(X) is equal to minterm zero,
the same. And this is because
as I said if you are in the
positive logic, if we only care
about when the function or when
the output of our system  isgoing
to be 1, and minterm 0 says
that if the binary
representation of the mintern,
minterm here is 0.
If the input is zero, The output
gonna be 1.
That's the way we associate min
terms to the Boolean expression
or Boolean function in the truth
table. So whenever the binary
representation of the minterm
happens in the input, the output
of the Boolean expression is going
to be 1.
And that was the NOT gate
we already introduced.
We could have this function or
this truth table. F(X) is equal to
X so whatever X is in the
output, we have the same
actually as the input, so this is
the identity function in math as
you remember. So if X is 0, the
output going to be 0. If X is 1,
the output gonna be one. But we
already knew that this is equal
to Minterm M1.
And The thing is, if you see
the Association you see that it
means that whenever the Binary
Digital of One happens in the
input, the Boolean expression or
function becomes one.
So F(X) is equal to M1 and there
is an is if in the input, we
have the binary digit for one,
the F(X) becomes one.
So we are going to come
up with the algorithm.
And for your
information, or given one input
and output is the same. This is
a new gate. This is not a
necessary gate. But if you know
in the market, the engineers
already built us this new gate
for us, which is called a digital
buffer. So the digital buffer get
does nothing just the input goes
to the output. Or you can build
the digital buffer, by applying 2
NOTs with each other. So X,
X bar, and then another not, so
not not becomes the same.
So this boolean expression
equal to mintern one is
equal to the digital buffer.
This gate, which is applying 2
nots on top of each other.
So now. We are going
to, I'm going to show you how we
can associate the minterm to
truth table and then come up
with the general algorithm to
build any boolean expression as
required for us to design.
So the next step is if you are given
two variables in the input, so
again. We have the truth table
with two variables in the left
side. X&Y, you could name it AB.
You could name it any variables,
for instance, A1, A2, X1, X2, anything
any variables. But the rules are
all the possibilities. We have
two variables, all the
possibilities or two to the
power of 4. 00 01 10 and 10.
In the right side we are given
the Boolean expression of
Boolean function based on the
two inputs, F(X,Y), so, based on
these these two inputs, we want
to build the function.
The immediate function would be
just outputting zero, for
instance, somebody ask us to just
output zero. Regardless of the
input. This is the most simplest
design for the constant function
0. Another very simple I
mean, Boolean expression would
be this. Regardless of the input,
we just want to output one, so
this is the constant function
one based on the input X&Y.
Besides these two simple
designs of simple boolean
expressions, we could have this.
As you remember, this is equal
to the truth table for the AND
gate, so F(X,Y) is equal to X&Y and
basically it says that whenever we
have one in all the inputs, the
output gonna be one. Else 0. again
because we are in the positive
logic, we only care about
The time that the output is gonna
be 1. And this is the AND gate,
we already saw this, and if we
wanted to associate the min
terms to this boolean expression
or function. So with different
expression of two variables, forms
of two variables, and zero is
this one. We already saw that,
and one is this and two is this
and M3 is this, so here the AND
gate is associated with the min
term 3. Why?
The reason is whenever we have
the Binary digit three in the
input for the two variables,
the output is gonna be 1.
So the AND gate could be equal
to minterm three, so whenever
we are given then and get it,
it means that the
output is equal to minterm
3, meaning that the input
must be at the binary digit for 3
to match the output one.
You could have this function, so
basically what happens when the
X is zero and Y is 1. So this
is another. I mean, Boolean
function. Somebody asked us, I
want to output only when the X
is zero and Y is one. So we just
form the truth table,
put the two variables and all the
possibilities and then the
required boolean function or
required functionality is this.
I just want to make out one
whenever this happens in the
input. But this is equal to mid
term 2. M2, because whenever we
have the binary digit of two in
the input the output going to
be one.
I don't care about the other
cases that makes the output
zero. I just care about the time
that the output is gonna be 1.
So we could say that we have
a boolean function or
Boolean expression equal to
M2 or X bar and Y.
And after having the truth
table, we can build the
digital unit by logical
design so this is the logical
design for this boolean
expression M2, so M2 means
that X Bar or X prime or X
not. And then AND buy one. So
this is the M2.
You could have this boolean
expression somebody asked us. I
just wanted to output one
whenever the first input is 1 and
the second output is 0.
So we said that this is equal to
M1, so we formed the truth
table. We say that in one
condition the output is gonna be
one, in other conditions the
output is gonna be 0, and then this is
equal to M1 because if the
binary digit for 1 happens in the
input, the output is gonna be 1.
And then we design it at
logical leve,  just X Y' AND
with each other.
And then we give this to
a electrical engineer to
build this circuit for
us and then we're done.
But for this function you could
say that whenever all the
inputs are zero, I want to
output one. So this is equal to
M0 and
the reason is if you have the
binary digit for zero in the
input the output is gonna be one.
And this is the logic circuits
for that. So basically we said
that X bar and Y Bar, which is
equal to M0. X Bar, Y bar AND with
each other. So then we give
it to the electrical engineer to
build this circuit for us.
So far, we have only one
time we could make the output
one or turn on the output.
Sometimes the requirement is
this, we want to output one
whenever these two cases happens
in the input for instance, if
both are zero or X is 1 and Y
is 0. We want to output one.
Else we output 0.
Again, for now we have to show
how can we express the boolean
function F(X,Y) based on the min
terms. So we come to
the first one.
So, just consider this case when
happens. This truth table
become one. It happens when the
input is 0. So X bar and Y bar
which is the midterm 0. So,
whenever the X is zero, X prime
is 1, Y is zero, Y bar is one, and
then one and one becomes one. So
the binary digits 00 must be in
the input in order to have this
one in the output.
What are the other cases?
Either this case happens in the
input or this case happens in
the output. So OR this case
happens in the input. Both cases
makes the output one, so we put
OR here, so either this, or
this case, the second one.
So when this happens when in
the output, we have the binary
digit. This. X is equal to 1 and
Y is equal to 0, which is the
minterm one because this is the
Binary Digital for 1.
So we could say that.
The output becomes one based on
this truth table whenever we
have M0 or M1 in the
input. In other words, if the
binary digit in the input is gonna
be 0, the output is gonna be one, or
if the Binary digit in the
input is gonna be 1, the output
going to be one in this case.
Sometimes, instead of, instead
of just saying M0 or M1 or M2 or
etc, we could say just the
Sigma. So Sigma M(0, 1)
in this truth table is equal to
sum of the midterms for the
zero and one.
It's another way to show the
boolean function of two
variables when I mean
this happens.
And then after the truth table,
mapping the Boolean function
based on the midterms, you can
design it as logical level.
So X bar. X
comes here, Y comes here.
X bar, Y bar AND with each
other? Here, the
second term was
X&Y bar, which is equal to M1.
So X. Y or Y prime AND
with each other, and then the
results OR with each other, so
this one OR this one. So the
result going to be this and this is
the logic circuit for the
Boolean function, this.
And then we give it to the
engineer to build this
for us. Another way to show this
is this. Usually we do not
consider did NOT gate in here.
Whenever we have the input right
away, we just create the not of the
input here. And then put a wire
so we have a wire for Y and we
have a wire for Y not?
You have a wire for X and we
have a wire for X Bar.
And then we just attach the
wiring based on our requirement,
so if we need X bar, Y bar, you
just attach X bar and Y bar to
the AND gate. Here we need
X, Y bar with the X wire and we
attach the X bar with the Y wire
and then attach it to the
end result is gonna be OR. Either
this case or this case is gonna output
1. In other cases, the output is
gonna be 0 and we don't care.
So what if the Boolean function
is this? Again, like before
we just have to think of
when the one happens in the
Boolean function or Boolean
expression in the output.
So the first one, is this.
X must be one and Y must be 0,
then we have to make it
bar and it becomes one.
This is equal to minterm one, M1.
The Next One is this, whenever in
the input, We have a zero in the
X and one in the Y, then X bar, Y bar
becomes one. This is
equal to minterm 2.
So in another way, we can
say that the XY in this truth
table is equal to sum of the
minterm one and two.
Sum of the minterm one and two.
And then based on this sum, we
can build the logical design for
that. So. X, Y bar.
X, Y bar AND with each other.
Here X bar, Y
AND with each other.
The interesting thing about this
function or this truth table or
this design is that you can see
that whenever the inputs are not
the same with each other, the output is
gonna be 1. 01 is 1 or 10 is 1. If the inputs are
the same, the output is going to be
0. So this is just an
interesting thing that
happens with this truth
table and this design, so
whenever X&Y are not of
each other, the output is
going to be 1.
And because of this interesting
property, the engineers in the
market, they built a new gate for
us called exclusive or.
I will show it like this. So
basically this is the thing
we see or we need.
But because of this interesting
property, they pack it into one
gate for us and this is called
exclusive or. Or XOR. And they
show it like this, X Exclusive
-OR by Y instead of just OR.
Uh, the the difference within
the XOR and OR gate is this.
You know, in natural processing
language, whenever we talk
we say that either X or Y
visually imply that you can
choose X or Y, but not both of
them. So, in natural language
processing whenever we say OR in our
talk, we usually mean exclusive
or: it means that either the
option is correct or either. You
can choose the option A or
option B, not both. But in
mathematics, whenever you use or,
it means that you are able to
pick both options.
So exclusive or is kind of OR in
our normal and natural language
processing or in normal talk,
so in our talk whenever we say
that OR in the logic sense, it means
exclusive or, just one of them
not both. But for the OR gate,
The difference is that you can
have one in the output whenever
you pick both I mean inputs.
So this is just an
interesting thing that happens
with this boolean
expression.
We could have this boolean
expression. So basically,
the output is gonna be one whenever
the inputs are the same.
So, but this is just I
mean for the sake of
analyzing the behavior. But for
us. We just wanted to see when
the output happens to be
one. Uh, so we have in order to
see this, we go for each one. The
first one happens when the input
is the binary digit for M0, 0 in the input and
zero in the input. So X
bar, Y bar becomes one and one
and one becomes one.
And another case is this, so
whenever we have one and one
in the input, so X must be one
and Y must be one in order to
have a one in the output, and
these two are equal to mid
term zero and three.
So if the input is the binary
digit for 0 or binary digit for three,
the output is gonna be one, else
gonna be 0.
You can say that the sum of the
minterm zero and three.
And this is the design,
X bar, Y bar AND with each
other. X&Y with each other and
then the result is OR.
So this is the requirement,
whenever the inputs are the
same, the output gonna be one.
So if both are zeroed out, they are
gonna be one. If both are one,
the output is gonna be 1.
This is kind of not XOR as
you can see here. It exactly the
invert of the XOR. That's why
we call this not not XOR,
which is called XNOR instead of
just not XOR because it cannot
be pronounced well so they put
it XNOR, so XNOR is like this.
So this is just a new gate.
It's not that important but because
of this interesting property
that whenever the inputs are the
same, the output going to be
one. This boolean function is
called XNOR and this is equal
to this logic circuit so.
If you go to the market, you can
build the XNOR for
yourself, or you can buy the XNOR
gate if it is available.
We could have this boolean
expression, you could say that
whenever these cases happens, I
want to output one.
So the same as before, you
see that we all come up with an
algorithm. We start with each
one and then put the form for
that case. Whenever that minterm
happens in the input the
output is gonna be one and then
OR all of these cases with
each other, so for the first
one, we have this.
This must be happening in the
input: X bar Y bar, meaning
that the X is zero, Y is 0
and then this becomes one.
Or this one.
This case, X happens to be one
and Y happens to be 0. Then it
becomes Y bar which is equal
to 1 and then AND each other
is one. Or this one.
So based on the number of
ones in the output, we
have different minterms.
So this is equal to minterm,
0, 1 and three because in the
input, we have to have the
binary digit for zero or one or
three to make the output one.
And if you are going to design
this at logical level, we could
simply use this, we have two
variables X&Y. We create the
not of each other at Y bar,
and X bar and then putting the
minterm so the first minterm is
X bar Y bar, minterm
0. The second one is
minterm one, so X, Y Bar and X&Y
Bar. And then the third minterm,
which is the M3. X&Y and then
OR them together.
This is the logic circuits for
the Boolean function as
required for us.
So this form of showing the
logic circuits is called sum of
products. And the reason is
you can see that first you
have to do AND.
So the AND is equal to product
or multiplication product.
And then finally OR.
In in other words, sum of products
we have 3 product here and then
sum altogether. This form is
called sum of products and the
interesting thing is
It has only two levels. The
first one, is the products, the
AND gates and the second level
is the sum or the OR gates.
So the first level, products, and
the second level, or, or sum of
the products. So.
We can build any logical
circuits based on the two levels
of AND and OR and sum of
products. For instance, given
three inputs. If you are asked
to output one if their are even
number of binary digits in the
input, we have to 1st build
the truth table with three
variables. And then whenever
we have even number of one in
the input, we wanna add put
one in the output so these
cases are this.
This zero amount of Binary digit
one, so zero is even,  one in the
output. In this case, we have
two 1s in the input, the output is
gonna be 1. In this case, we
have two 1s. Again, One. And also
this. The other cases. We have
an odd number of 1s. So the
only case we have one is the
cases that we have even number
of 1s in the input.
And then we just simply count
the times that the
output is gonna be 1.
So the first one.
The second one.
The 3rd and 4th one.
So we have 4 minterms.
In in other words, we could say
that this is the truth table for
minterm 0,3,5 and six.
So, in order to answer this
question. We have to build the
truth table with three
variables and then times
that, it becomes one in the output
and then sum the minterms.
And then design it like this.
The first midterm, second
minterm, 3rd and 4th minterm, and
then OR them together with each
other. Sum of products, 2 levels
and or. And this is the logic
circuit with design to answer
the required question. If
you're given an even number of one
in the inputs in X&Y&Z. If we
have even number of Binary digit
one in the input, the output is
always going to be 1.
This is the products.
And this is the sum. Sum
of product into two levels.
Thank you so much for your
attention and this is the topic
we covered so far.
Next week is the reading week.
We don't have any session, but
I'm available in the office hour
and in the Blackboard, I
will put an announcement that we
will practice some questions in
the lecture assignments and also
in the lab assignments, and we
will practice some examples for
the midterm exam.
And the form of the exam is gonna
be on the Blackboard. I will
explain it in the Blackboard and
any other questions?
Uh for the lab grades,
today at midnight.
Ah.
Oh, sorry actually the deadline
for the release date is today
midnight. And also the deadline
for the next lab is today at
midnight too. I'll try to post
it marks as soon as possible so
that you have the chance to know
your grades before the second
lab or assignments sure.
Yes, actually in the exam you
are required, you are given a
question and you have to design
the logic circuit like this at
logical level. You have to draw
it with pen or paper with pen. Or
you can use some, there are some
softwares in the Internet.
That you can for instance,
you can use Microsoft Visio in
the Microsoft Visio, it has the
gates, so you can put these
elements together in order to
build your logic circuits.
There are some softwares, also
you can use your pen to draw
this. But yes, you have to
learn how to draw the logic
circuit at logical level because
we have to give this to the
engineer to build these circuits
for us. So it's kind of a
figure for your logical design.
Yes, I mean next
week in the Reading Week, in
the office hour, I'm going to
practice the questions in
the lecture assignments and
also some midterm exam
samples.
...
In signed Radix complement
does the twos complement
represent negative?
"To convert to positive or negative should
I do the r's complement of that r based number"
Oh, oh if I
correctly understand your
question Ishmamur. The thing is
in the questions,
when we put in the questions,
we usually put the plus or
minus symbols just to show that
we want to represent it as a
positive or negative one, or we
can use these symbols for
showing you that you are going to do
addition or subtraction.
But in the real sense, we don't
have any symbol to represent
positive or negative signs so
when you represent it in a
base. You have to show that it
is positive or negative, but you
cannot show it by these symbols
plus and minus.
But in the paper, in the question
because we can, we wanted to
show you that this is a negative
number and present it as a
negative number, we just use the
symbol negative. So the symbol
negative and the symbol minus
and the symbol plus is just for
your information that we require
you to represent it as negative
or positive. But when you
represented in a system, for
instance in a signed radix or in a
signed magnitude, you have to
use their system.
So in the question, we just say
that this is the magnitude. For
instance file and we want you to
represent it as minus five. So
in the question we set uit p minus
5. But when you represent in
sign magnitude or in the
radix complement, you have to
convert it to the actual
negative format, because in
Binary or any other basis, we
don't have any digit for the
symbols plus or minus.
I hope I answered your
questions.
Uh again, I mean, the thing is Abdulwahhab
yes. The due date based on the
Ontario time is next day at 7:00
AM. But because we consider
all around the world, it is
midnight, all around the world.
So if you are living for
instance, in Japan. The Midnight
is a little bit in the morning
based on the Ontario time.
So please do not do that.
I mean because you can
simply consider the due date
midnight wherever you live.
Just to make it easy for
yourself, if you leave it up
until the I mean, the last
minutes, for instance 7:00 AM based on
the Ontario, there might be
some technical issue and then
you missed the deadline.
So it's easier for you to
consider the midnight
wherever you live.
So will you post midterm
practice? Yes, I will post
some practice or sample exam
for the midterms in the
Blackboard. I will do that
for sure in the
reading week. Then you have
the chance to practice that.
Also those practices, I will do in
the office hour. I will put
it in the Blackboard.
Actually, I record my office
hour and then I put the
recordings on Blackboard
so you can see the practices.
So Gabriel ask Simon is EFFFF a
negative number in base 16.
Oh, you have to you have to be
careful. Then the number EFFFF,
if the question says that we are
in the signed magnitude system.
OK, then you see that OK, we are
in the signed magnitude, the
highest position actually shows
the sign. So here the highest
position is E. It is non 0. So
the given number is negative. So
then you start converting the
FFF for instance, the decimal
system to see what's the
negative number so given, for
instance, here we have,
5F. 5F is equal to
31. So 30 I believe so yes,
31. So it is minus 31.
I hope I answered your question.
So it depends on the question.
If they say that the given
number is the sign magnitude,
that's the way you interpret the
number. But if the given number
is
in the 16's complement system.
Then you have to 1st figure out
what's the first half and if the
number is more than that first
half, this is a negative. So
then you have to apply 16's
complement to figure out what's
the negative number, so it is
based on the system.
No no no as I said, I mean, if
you are living in Ontario. If
you if you submit your
assignment at 7:00 AM, that's
the last moment you can do that,
and we accept that. But we
don't accept at 7:01 AM.
For instance, one minute
after 7:00 AM.
Thank you so much and I'll be in
the office hour for your
questions. Have a great day! Bye.